<!-- .slide: data-background="#E6F7FF" -->

# What is a Language Server?

- A process that speaks the Language Server Protocol
- Can be written in any language as long as it supports a JSON stream or HTTP webserver API
- Upon an initialization request it responds with all the features it implements
- Features include: autocompletion, debuggers, syntax problems, source links, tooltips, ...

---
# Portable?

The Language Server Protocol is not specific to VSCode. You can use POET in other popular editors (Vim/Emacs)


---
## How POET uses a Langauge Server

Our Language server mostly listens to updates in CNXML and COLLXML files as well as images and the [/META-INF/books.xml](https://github.com/openstax/poet/blob/main/META-INF/books.xml) manifest file.

Specifically, Language Server listens to ([server.ts](https://github.com/openstax/poet/blob/main/server/src/server.ts)):
- File change events (to update our repo model)
- XML Document updates (before saving occurs)
- dot-completion when creating image links
- links to other CNXML modules
- Custom "ToC Update" events and updates the in-memory model and files
- Syntax Errors (VSCode Diagnostics) whenever the in-memory model changes


---
# Book Model

Relax-NG and XSD schemas are good but have limitations.

We check for the following in the Language Server:

- [bundle.ts](https://github.com/openstax/poet/blob/main/server/src/model/bundle.ts#L56-L63) Missing book COLLXML file
- [book.ts](https://github.com/openstax/poet/blob/main/server/src/model/book.ts#L136-L152) Missing Pages, Duplicate Chapter titles, Duplicate Pages in ToC
- [page.ts](https://github.com/openstax/poet/blob/main/server/src/model/page.ts#L166) Missing images, missing target pages, missing target elements in a page, duplicate UUIDs, malformed UUID
- All orphaned books, pages, & images

---
# Model Don'ts

The [server/model/](https://github.com/openstax/poet/blob/main/server/src/model) directory contains all the parsing & validation logic. Notably, it has the following explicit requirements:

- **NO** async code
- **NO** filesystem read/write
- **NO** VSCode imports
- **NO** null pointers
    - This means a link to a Page that does not exist will link to a Page object (whose `.exists` is false)
- **NO** duplicate objects that represent the same "Book" object
    - This means 2 objects that represent m123 will **always** be `===` to each other

---
# Model Do's

These requirements have a few consequences.

Every Bundle/Book/Page/Image has:

- `.isLoaded()` and `.load(fileContents)` methods
- `.exists()` method
- `.getValidationErrors()` method


The CLI instantiates a model that's [wired up](https://github.com/openstax/poet/blob/main/server/src/model/_cli.ts#L27-L30) to the filesystem and the VSCode LanguageServer instantiates a model that's hooked up to VSCode APIs.

This separation allows the LanguageServer to [validate content before it's saved](https://github.com/openstax/poet/blob/main/server/src/server.ts#L121-L124) to the filesystem.


---
# Freebie: CLI

Since the model is filesystem-agnostic, a commandline client is implemented by writing [50 lines of code](https://github.com/openstax/poet/blob/main/server/src/model/_cli.ts).

This can be used for book validation in CI tests or QA.

```bash
npx ts-node@10.1.0 ./src/model/_cli.ts /path/to/book/repo /path/to/another/book/repo

# Output:
# =====================
# Validation Errors: 2
# modules/m123/index.cnxml 4:13 Missing Link Target
# collections/test.xml 13:5 Duplicate Chapter Title
```

---
## Validation Errors
#### (aka "Problems" section aka Diagnostics)

The way Validation errors show up in the "Problems" area of VSCode is two parts.

---
## Validation Errors (cont)
### Initial Setup

1. The extension client starts up, spawns our Language Server, and registers it with VSCode
1. The Langauge Server tells VSCode that it's interested in DocumentChanged Events

---
## Validation Errors (cont)
### Steps
1. The user types a letter on their keyboard
1. VSCode sends the LanguageServer a DocumentChanged event
1. LangServer updates the model
1. As part of sending Diagnostics events (see [Lang Server Protocol](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/specification-current/#diagnostic)) LangServer asks the model for validation errors and then builds up a Diagnostics entry for each file


---
# More Details

- Async Loading
- Quarx
- Linking the Model to VSCode Language Server

---
# Async Loading

https://github.com/openstax/poet/blob/main/server/src/job-runner.ts

To speed up and give validation errors before the whole book is loaded and because the model is synchronous we have a Job queue that, given a model object, loads it and its dependencies.

There are 2 priorities in the queue: low-priority jobs that load all the books and high-priority jobs that are whichever file is currently open in the editor.

---
## Quarx

Rather than keeping track of which files need to be re-parsed when a file changes (added/edited/removed) and then send Diagnostics events to the extension client, we use a tiny library called [quarx](https://github.com/dmaevsky/quarx).

It's mobx but has the following features: synchronous, 200 lines

---

## Quarx Example

```js
import { autorun, computed, observable, batch } from 'quarx';

const a = observable.box(1);
const b = observable.box(2);
const a_plus_b = computed(() => a.get() + b.get());

console.log('Initial calculation');
autorun(() => console.log(`a + b = ${a_plus_b.get()}`));

console.log('First update');
batch(() => {
  a.set(5);
  b.set(6);
});

console.log('Second update');
batch(() => {
  a.set(4);
  b.set(7);
});
```

Output:

```text
Initial calculation
a + b = 3
First update
a + b = 11
Second update
(nothing. Because the value of a_plus_b did not change)
```

---

## Quarx links

- [quarx library](https://github.com/dmaevsky/quarx)
- [mutable boxes](https://github.com/openstax/poet/blob/main/server/src/model/page.ts#L49-L53)


---
## Model Manager

This provides an interface between the Model and vscode events that come in to the language server.

It can load files, listens to file update events, creates new files, saves files when the model changes...

---
## Questions?